The Project Gutenberg eBook of Guide to the Norris Geyser Basin, by
George A. Algard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Guide to the Norris Geyser Basin

Author: George A. Algard

Release Date: September 22, 2021 [eBook #66364]

Language: English

Produced by: Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net 

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GUIDE TO THE NORRIS GEYSER
BASIN ***





                              GUIDE TO THE
                          NORRIS GEYSER BASIN


                                                                     15¢

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]




                          NORRIS GEYSER BASIN


The Norris Geyser Basin was named for Philetus W. Norris who served as
Yellowstone’s second superintendent from 1877 until 1882. Although he
did not discover it, his explorations and reports were largely
responsible for calling attention to that area.

Norris is considered to be the hottest and most active geyser basin in
Yellowstone. Here geysers and hot springs exhibit greater change in
activity over a short span of time than elsewhere in the park. It is not
unusual for a new hot spring to come into existence literally overnight.
The new feature may last for just a few days or perhaps a month or so;
upon occasion some have endured for many years.

Because of constant change in the thermal features, the ground here is
unstable and hazardous in many locations. Therefore, you are required to
stay on designated trails and boardwalks at all times. This not only
protects you from possible serious burns but also helps preserve the
features as well. Remember also not to throw any objects into thermal
features. Debris of any kind in a hot spring or geyser could clog the
vent and destroy the feature. Because many scalding hot pools and
run-off channels are near trails and boardwalks, pets are not permitted
on the trails.

The fact that thermal features change may come as a surprise, but
remember that geysers, hot springs and other thermal phenomena are
subject to natural stresses just like plant and animal communities. Of
course the changes in thermal activity result from a different set of
factors than those affecting plants and animals. Can you guess what they
might be?

Shifts in the earth’s crust (earthquakes) result in movements along
cracks and fissures in the ground. These tremors usually cause changes
in the underground “plumbing systems” of thermal features, thus altering
activity patterns. Look for signs of recent activity variations as you
walk along the trails, or ask a naturalist if there have been some
recent changes.

As you explore, look closely at the often intricate formations around
the edges of a few hot pools, geysers and in some thermal runoff
channels. You will notice a mineral called sinter or geyserite (a form
of silicon dioxide, SiO₂) being deposited like tiny spines. These rather
prickly formations result when geyserite is deposited from slightly acid
water, a characteristic of most thermal water in the Norris area. This
is in contrast to the bead-like structures that result when geyserite
forms from slightly alkaline water found in thermal features in the Old
Faithful area.

Notice too the variety of colors staining the basins. The refraction
(breaking up) of light, mineral deposits and living organisms, algae and
bacteria, all add their hues. The assortment of colors reflects
variations in water temperature and chemistry.

As you enjoy your walk remember that Norris is a great natural preserve
where nature is constantly at work designing and redesigning one of its
most unusual displays. We are only visitors here and must not spoil it
in any way. It also serves as a great natural research laboratory where
scientists from all over the world learn more about geothermal energy.
Help us preserve this unique area so that the next generation and those
who follow can come and enjoy it in the same grandeur you did.

The Norris Geyser Basin is made up of two or more less separate areas
called Porcelain Basin and Back Basin. Both basins are served by trails
which begin at the Norris Museum and are shown on this map. The
following briefly describes a few features in each.




                  THERMAL FEATURES IN PORCELAIN BASIN


VALENTINE GEYSER—Located at the base of a large pear-shaped alcove,
Valentine is a typical cone type geyser that first erupted on
Valentine’s Day, 1907. Its activity has varied considerably—being
dormant some seasons, erratic during others, yet showing a high degree
of regularity at times. During the past several seasons, it has erupted
from a minimum of once every two days to a maximum of once a day. An
eruption lasts 5-7 minutes and reaches a height of 20-50 feet (6-15 m.)
above the seven foot cone. The eruption is followed by a steam phase
lasting an hour.

LEDGE GEYSER—The largest geyser in the Porcelain Basin, changed
dramatically after an earthquake that occurred June 30, 1975. In 1974 it
had been erupting about twice a day, but after the quake Ledge was
dormant for nearly two years. Then during the summer of 1977 it had but
two eruptions. Check the prediction board at the museum to see if Ledge
Geyser is active this year.

AFRICA GEYSER—named for the spring that preceded it which was roughly
the shape of the continent. The spring became a geyser in February of
1971. At first it was intermittent but as time passed the periods
between eruptions grew shorter until it became a constant geyser. In
1977 it was always powerful—sometimes emitting a mixture of steam and
water; other times just steam.

THE WHIRLIGIGS AND CONSTANT GEYSERS—these three features seem to be
interconnected. Constant Geyser, dormant for several years, reactivated
in the early ’70’s and now erupts up to 30 feet (9 m.) once or twice an
hour; often prior to an eruption of one of the Whirligigs. In recent
years, Big and Little Whirligig have traded active periods. When one is
more active, the other is less. Watch for the 15 foot (4 m.) angled
plume from Little Whirligig’s orange vent or listen to the distinctive
chugging produced during Big Whirligig’s splashing eruption. As with
many geysers, the water level rises in these pools prior to an eruption.

EBONY AND BEAR DEN GEYSERS—are another set of related features. In the
’60’s Bear Den Geyser first appeared and as it increased in activity,
Ebony Geyser became dormant. Today Bear Den Geyser erupts in bursts,
arcing up to 40 feet (12 m.) from the den-like vent, four to six times
daily. The death of Ebony Geyser may have been hastened by objects
thrown into its vent by thoughtless visitors. This debris is cemented
into place by the silica deposited from the water, choking off the vent.
Minute Geyser in the Back Basin may have suffered a similar fate.




                     THERMAL FEATURES IN BACK BASIN


EMERALD SPRING—The colors in and around thermal features are often
created by several kinds of algae that grow in hot water. However, the
deep green color of this spring is a result of a combination of the
yellow color from the sulphur lining the edge of the pool with the blue
that is refracted (“scattered”) from the clear water in the pool. The
bowl of this feature is about 27 feet (8 m.) deep and the temperature
normally varies between 194 and 200 degrees F. (90-93° C.)

STEAMBOAT GEYSER—The world’s largest geyser, Steamboat has eruptions of
more than 300 feet (91 meters). It was largely dormant for nine years,
then startled observers in March 1978 with a full-scale eruption. The
water phase lasted approximately 20 minutes, followed by bellowing steam
for over 40 hours. This spectacular display inundated the immediate
area. At this writing, March 30, 1978, it is not known if Steamboat’s
eruptions will follow any pattern. Between 1961 and March 1969, it had a
total of 103 major eruptions, none of which could be predicted. You can
still see the effects of downpouring water on the landscape which killed
trees and scoured away soil. The nine-year respite allowed new lodgepole
pines to gain a foothold. We hope you are fortunate enough to witness
Steamboat Geyser and share in the excitement. Remember—protect camera
and eye glass lenses from the spray as it can scratch glass after
drying.

CISTERN SPRING—In 1966 this feature changed from a grayish-black color
to its present brilliant blue. Concurrent with this the overflow
increased killing many trees near the spring. Since then a silica
terrace has rapidly built up. When Steamboat had a major eruption the
water level in Cistern dropped 4-8 feet, (1.2-2.4 m.) with a
corresponding drop in water temperature of around 60 degrees F. This
seems to indicate some connection between the two features. Whether or
not the increased water output of Cistern has resulted in the decline of
Steamboat is still unknown.

ECHINUS GEYSER (ē-kī′-nŭs)—although not as well known as some other
geysers, erupts in a display that surpasses many of them. The name comes
from the sinter spine-covered rocks surrounding the pool which bear a
fanciful resemblance to spiny sea urchins. _Echinus_ was the Greek name
for these tide-pool dwellers. Stop and watch the water fill the basin
and begin to boil. Soon it will be propelled skyward in great explosive
bursts of steam and water, some reaching heights of over 75 feet (23
m.). Usually the eruptions last three to six minutes but in 1977 Echinus
was erupting for up to twelve minutes. After erupting the pool drains
and begins to refill. Intervals between eruptions may be as short as 45
minutes or better than 75 minutes. Listen for the peculiar gurgling
sound produced as the vent drains after each eruption.

VIXEN GEYSER—Although its usual eruptions are small compared to others
(5-15 feet every few minutes), the geyser is unique in that water comes
from a circular tub-like vent. During normal activity little water is
ejected. Occasionally Vixen may have major eruptions of considerable
water, lasting 5 to 50 minutes and playing up to 30 feet. Listen for the
peculiar gurgling sound produced as the vent drains after each eruption.




                       TODAY’S GEYSER PREDICTIONS

(Obtain data from the museum prediction board or from a naturalist).

  Echinus          ______________________________
  Ledge            ______________________________
  Valentine        ______________________________
  Others           ______________________________
                   ______________________________
                   ______________________________

    Text written by George A. Algard, Norris Summer Naturalist 3/74
                                  4/78

    [Illustration: NORRIS GEYSER BASIN]

  BACK BASIN
    Phillip’s Caldron
    Grey Lakes
    Green Dragon Spring
    Yellow Funnel Spring
    Palpitator Spring
  Pearl Geyser
  Vixen Geyser
  Black Hermit’s Caldron
  Minute Geyser
  Mt. Holmes (10,336 feet—3160 meters) visible to the northwest
  Veteran Geyser
  Monarch Geyser Crater
  Emerald Spring
  Bathtub Spring
  PORCELAIN BASIN
    Ebony Geyser
    Bear Den Geyser
    Crackling Lake
    Whale’s Mouth
  Dark Cavern Geyser
  Arch Steam Vent
  Cistern Spring
  NORRIS MUSEUM
  Steamboat Geyser
  Valentine Geyser
  Lodge Geyser
  Little Whirligig Geyser
  Sieve Lake
  Africa Geyser
  Pinwheel Geyser
  Echinus Geyser
  Hurricane Vent
  Colloidal Pool
  Congress Pool
  Ragged Spouter
  Blue Geyser
  Feisty Geyser
  Carnegie Drill Site
  Parking
  Porcelain Terrace Springs
  Nuphar Lake
  LEGEND
    trails and boardwalk
    described thermal features
    other thermal features
    roads and parking
  TO MADISON—16 MILES—26 KM
  TO MAMMOTH HOT SPRINGS—22 MILES—35 KM
  TO CAMPGROUND—½ MILE—⅘ KM
  TO CANYON VILLAGE—12 MILES—19 KM

                         DANGEROUS THERMAL AREA
                       Boiling Water—Thin Crusts
                  Always Stay on Constructed Walkways




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GUIDE TO THE NORRIS GEYSER
BASIN ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
